Add documentation for managing data prepper source coordination (#4758)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/managing-data-prepper/source-coordination.md

---
layout: default
title: Source coordination
nav_order: 35
parent: Managing Data Prepper
---

# Source coordination

_Source coordination_ is the concept of coordinating and distributing work between data sources of Data Prepper in a multi-node environment. Some data sources such as Amazon Kinesis or Amazon SQS, handle coordination natively. Other data sources, such as OpenSearch, Amazon S3, DynamoDb, or JDBC/ODBC do not support source coordination.

> Source coordination in Data Prepper decides which partition of work is done by each node in the Data Prepper cluster and prevents duplicate partitions of work once the node completes work.

Author: maybe `once the node completes processing of that partition`

> Data Prepper source coordination decides which partition of work is performed by each node in the Data Prepper cluster and prevents duplicate partitions of work once the node completes work.

Reviewer: How about this? @natebower 

```suggestion
Data Prepper source coordination decides which partition of work is performed by each node in the Data Prepper cluster and prevents duplicate partitions of work after.
```

Reviewer 2: Per our discussion, if the sentence can end at "work" and not lose its meaning, I'm fine with that.

| `partitionOwnershipTimeout` | Timestamp  | Whenever a Data Prepper node acquires a partition, a 10 minute timeout is given to the owner of the partition to handle the case of a node crashing. The ownership is renewed with another 10 minutes when the owner saves state of the partition.  |
| `sourcePartitionStatus` | Enum | Represents the current state of the partition: `ASSIGNED` means the partition is currently being processed. `UNASSIGNED` means the partition is waiting to be processed. `CLOSED` means the partition is waiting to be processed at a later date;. Lastly, `COMPLETED` means the partition is already processed. |           
| `reOpenAt` | Timestamp  | Represents the time that CLOSED partitions re-open and are considered available for processing. Only applies to CLOSED partitions. |
| `closedCount` | Long | Tracks how many times the partition has been marked as `CLOSED`.|

## Acquiring partitions

Partitions are acquired in the order that they are returned in the `List<PartitionIdentifer>` provided by the source. When a node attempts to acquire a partition, Data Prepper performs the following steps.

> 1.  Query the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check if any of these `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition owners. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing, which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Data Prepper queries the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check whether any `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition owners. This is intended to assign priority to partitions that have had nodes crash in the middle of processing, which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 
```

> 2. After querying `ASSIGNED` partitions, Data Prepper queries the `CLOSED` partitions to see if any of the partition's `reOpenAt` timestamps have been reached. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. After querying `ASSIGNED` partitions, Data Prepper queries the `CLOSED` partitions to determine whether any of the partition's `reOpenAt` timestamps have been reached. 
```

> 3. If there are no `ASSIGNED` or `CLOSED` partitions available, then Data Prepper queries the `UNASSIGNED` partitions one of these is partitions is `ASSIGNED`.

Reviewer 2: Should "until" precede "one"?

> 3. If there are no `ASSIGNED` or `CLOSED` partitions available, then Data Prepper queries the `UNASSIGNED` partitions one of these is partitions is `ASSIGNED`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If there are no `ASSIGNED` or `CLOSED` partitions available, then Data Prepper queries the `UNASSIGNED` partitions until on of these partitions is `ASSIGNED`.
```

> If this flow occurs, and no partition is acquired by the node, then the partition supplier function provided in the `getNextPartition` method of `SourceCoordinator` will create new partitions. After the supplier function completes, Data Prepper again queries the partitions for `ASSIGNED`, `CLOSED`, and `UNASSIGNED`.

Reviewer 2: Should "the" precede `SourceCoordinator`?

Reviewer: I don't think so, since we're referring to the setting and not the concept.

## Global state

Any function that is passed to the `getNextPartition` method creates new partitions with a global state of `Map<String, Object>`. This state is shared between all of the nodes in the cluster, and is guaranteed to only be run by a single node at a time as the source sees fit.

## Configuration

The following table provide optional configuration values for `source_coordination`.

| Value | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `partition_prefix` | String | A prefix to the `sourceIdentifier` used differentiate between Data Prepper clusters that are sharing the same distributed store. |

> | `store` | Object  | The object that makes up the configuration for the store to be used, where the key is the name of the store, such as `in_memory` or `dynamodb`, and the value is any configurations available on that store type. |

Reviewer: Comprises

If `ttl` is not configured on the table, any items no longer needed in the table must be cleaned manually.

The following shows the full set of permissions needed for Data Prepper to create the table, enable `ttl`, and interact with the table:

```json
{
  "Sid": "ReadWriteSourceCoordinationDynamoStore",
  "Effect": "Allow",
  "Action": [
    "dynamodb:DescribeTimeToLive",
    "dynamodb:UpdateTimeToLive",
    "dynamodb:DescribeTable",
    "dynamodb:CreateTable",
    "dynamodb:GetItem",
    "dynamodb:PutItem",
    "dynamodb:Query"
  ],
  "Resource": [
    "arn:aws:dynamodb:${REGION}:${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}:table/${TABLE_NAME}",
    "arn:aws:dynamodb:${REGION}:${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}:table/${TABLE_NAME}/index/source-status"
  ]
}
```

| Value | Required | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | 
| `table_name` | Yes | String  | The name of the table to be used for source coordination. |

> | `region` | Yes | String | The region of the table. |

Reviewer: It refers to the region of the Dynamo Store, which could be seperate from AWS.

> | `region` | Yes | String | The region of the table. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `region` | Yes | String | The region of the DynamoDB table. |
```

> | `region` | Yes | String | The region of the table. |

Reviewer 2: Should we specify that, then, in order to prevent any confusion?

| `sts_external_id` | No | String  | The external ID used in the API call to assume the `sts_role_arn`. |
| `skip_table_creation` | No | Boolean  | If set to `true` when using an existing store, and the attempt to create the store will skip. Default is `false`. |
| `provisioned_write_capacity_units` | No | Integer |  The number of write capacity units to configure on the table. Default is `10`. |
| `provisioned_read_capacity_units`  | No | Integer | The number of read capacity units to configure on the table. Default is `10`. |
| `ttl` | Duration | Optional. The duration of the time to live for the items in the table. This TTL is extended by this duration when an update is made to the item. Defaults to no TTL being used on the table. |
  
The following example shows a `dynamodb` store:

```yaml
source_coordination:
  store:
     dynamodb:
       table_name: "DataPrepperSourceCoordinationStore"
       region: "us-east-1"
       sts_role_arn: "arn:aws:iam::##########:role/SourceCoordinationTableRole"
       ttl: "P7D"
       skip_table_creation: true
```

#### In-memory store (default)

> The following example shows an `in_memory` store, best used with a single node cluster:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows an `in_memory` store, which is best used with a single-node cluster:
```

```yaml
source_coordination:
  store:
    in_memory:
```

## Metrics

Metrics in source coordination are interpreted differently depending on which source is configured. The format of source coordination metrics is `<sub-pipeline-name>_source_coordinator_<metric-name>`. You can use the sub-pipeline name is used to identify which source these metrics are for because each sub-pipeline is unique to each source.

### Progress metrics

The following list details metrics related to partition progress:

* `partitionsCreatedCount`: The number of partition items that have been created. For an S3 scan, this is the number of objects that have had partitions created for them.
* `partitionsCompleted`: The number of partitions that have been fully processed and marked as `COMPLETED`. For an S3 scan, this is the number of objects that have been processed.

> * `noPartitionsAcquired`: The number of times that a node has attempted to acquire a partition to do work on, but has found no available partitions in the store. Use this to indicate that there is no more data coming in the source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `noPartitionsAcquired`: The number of times that a node has attempted to acquire a partition on which to perform work but has found no available partitions in the store. Use this to indicate that there is no more data coming into the source.
```

> * `partitionsAcquired`: The number of partitions that have been acquired by nodes to do work on. In non-error scenarios, this should be equal to the number of partitions created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `partitionsAcquired`: The number of partitions that have been acquired by nodes on which to perform work. In non-error scenarios, this should be equal to the number of partitions created.
```

* `partitionsClosed`: The number of partitions that have been marked as `CLOSED`. This is only applicable to sources that use the CLOSED functionality.

> The following list details metrics related to partition errors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following are metrics related to partition errors:
```

* `partitionNotFoundErrors`: Indicates that a partition item that is actively owned by a node does not have a corresponding store item. This should only occur if an item in the table has been manually deleted.

> * `partitionNotOwnedErrors`: Indicates an issue where the node that owns a partition loses ownership due to the partition ownership timeout expiring. Unless the source is able to checkpoint the partition with `saveState`, this error results in duplicate item processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `partitionNotOwnedErrors`: Indicates that a node that owns a partition has lost ownership due to the partition ownership timeout expiring. Unless the source is able to checkpoint the partition with `saveState`, this error results in duplicate item processing.
```

---
layout: default
title: Source coordination
nav_order: 35
parent: Managing Data Prepper
---

# Source coordination

_Source coordination_ is the concept of coordinating and distributing work between data sources of Data Prepper in a multi-node environment. Some data sources such as Amazon Kinesis or Amazon SQS, handle coordination natively. Other data sources, such as OpenSearch, Amazon S3, DynamoDb, or JDBC/ODBC do not support source coordination.

Source coordination in Data Prepper decides which partition of work is done by each node in the Data Prepper cluster and prevents duplicate partitions of work once the node completes work.

Inspired by the K[inesis Client Library](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/streams/latest/dev/shared-throughput-kcl-consumers.html), Data Prepper utilizes a distributed store in the form of a lease to handle the distribution and deduplication of work.

> ## Formatting partition items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Formatting partitions
```

| `partitionProgressState` | String  | A JSON string object representing the progress made on a partition of work, or any additional metadata that may be needed by the source in the case of another node picking up where the last node left off during a crash.  |
| `partitionOwnershipTimeout` | Timestamp  | Whenever a Data Prepper node acquires a partition, a 10 minute timeout is given to the owner of the partition to handle the case of a node crashing. The ownership is renewed with another 10 minutes when the owner saves state of the partition.  |
| `sourcePartitionStatus` | Enum | Represents the current state of the partition: `ASSIGNED` means the partition is currently being processed. `UNASSIGNED` means the partition is waiting to be processed. `CLOSED` means the partition is waiting to be processed at a later date;. Lastly, `COMPLETED` means the partition is already processed. |           
| `reOpenAt` | Timestamp  | Represents the time that CLOSED partitions re-open and are considered available for processing. Only applies to CLOSED partitions. |
| `closedCount` | Long | Tracks how many times the partition has been marked as `CLOSED`.|

> ## Acquiring items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Acquiring partitions
```

> Items are acquired in the order that they are returned in the `List<PartitionIdentifer>` provided by the source. When a node attempts to acquire a partition, Data Prepper performs the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partitions are acquired in the order that they are returned in the `List<PartitionIdentifer>` provided by the source. When a node attempts to acquire a partition, Data Prepper performs the following steps.
```

> 1. First query the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check if any of these `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition ownerships. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing,which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First query the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check if any of these `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition ownerships. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing, which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 
```

> 1. First query the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check if any of these `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition ownerships. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing, which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Query the `ASSIGNED` partitions to check if any of these `ASSIGNED` partitions have expired partition owners. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing, which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. 
```

2. After querying `ASSIGNED` partitions, Data Prepper queries the `CLOSED` partitions to see if any of the partition's `reOpenAt` timestamps have been reached. 
3. If there are no `ASSIGNED` or `CLOSED` partitions available, then Data Prepper queries the `UNASSIGNED` partitions one of these is partitions is `ASSIGNED`.

If this flow occurs, and no partition is acquired by the node, then the partition supplier function provided in the `getNextPartition` method of `SourceCoordinator` will create new partitions. After the supplier function completes, Data Prepper again queries the partitions for `ASSIGNED`, `CLOSED`, and `UNASSIGNED`.

## Global state

> Any function that is passed to the `getNextPartition` method that creates new partitions with a global state of `Map<String, Object>`. This state is shared between all of the nodes in the cluster, and is guaranteed to only be run by a single node at a time as the source sees fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any function that is passed to the `getNextPartition` method creates new partitions with a global state of `Map<String, Object>`. This state is shared between all of the nodes in the cluster, and is guaranteed to only be run by a single node at a time as the source sees fit.
```

## Configuration

The following table provide optional configuration values for `source_coordination`.

| Value | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `partition_prefix` | String | A prefix to the `sourceIdentifier` used differentiate between Data Prepper clusters that are sharing the same distributed store. |
| `store` | Object  | The object that makes up the configuration for the store to be used, where the key is the name of the store, such as `in_memory` or `dynamodb`, and the value is any configurations available on that store type. |

> ### Distributed Stores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Supported stores
```

| `skip_table_creation` | No | Boolean  | If set to `true` when using an existing store, and the attempt to create the store will skip. Default is `false`. |
| `provisioned_write_capacity_units` | No | Integer |  The number of write capacity units to configure on the table. Default is `10`. |
| `provisioned_read_capacity_units`  | No | Integer | The number of read capacity units to configure on the table. Default is `10`. |
| `ttl` | Duration | Optional. The duration of the time to live for the items in the table. This TTL is extended by this duration when an update is made to the item. Defaults to no TTL being used on the table. |
  
The following example shows a `dynamodb` store:

```yaml
source_coordination:
  store:
     dynamodb:
       table_name: "DataPrepperSourceCoordinationStore"
       region: "us-east-1"
       sts_role_arn: "arn:aws:iam::##########:role/SourceCoordinationTableRole"
       ttl: "P7D"
       skip_table_creation: true
```

#### In-memory store (default)

The following example shows an `in_memory` store, best used with single node cluster:

```yaml
source_coordination:
  store:
    in_memory:
```

## Metrics

> Metrics in source coordination are interpreted differently depending on which source is configured. The format of source coordination all metrics is `<sub-pipeline-name>_source_coordinator_<metric-name>`. You can use the sub-pipeline name is used to identify which source these metrics are for because each sub-pipeline is unique to each source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics in source coordination are interpreted differently depending on which source is configured. The format of source coordination metrics is `<sub-pipeline-name>_source_coordinator_<metric-name>`. You can use the sub-pipeline name is used to identify which source these metrics are for because each sub-pipeline is unique to each source.
```

### Progress metrics

The following list details metrics related to partition progress:

* `partitionsCreatedCount`: The number of partition items that have been created. For an S3 scan, this is the number of objects that have had partitions created for them.
* `partitionsCompleted`: The number of partitions that have been fully processed and marked as `COMPLETED`. For an S3 scan, this is the number of objects that have been processed.
* `noPartitionsAcquired`: The number of times that a node has attempted to acquire a partition to do work on, but has found no available partitions in the store. Use this to indicate that there is no more data coming in the source.
* `partitionsAcquired`: The number of partitions that have been acquired by nodes to do work on. In non-error scenarios, this should be equal to the number of partitions created.
* `partitionsClosed`: The number of partitions that have been marked as `CLOSED`. This is only applicable to sources that use the CLOSED functionality.

> The following list details metric related to partition errors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following list details metrics related to partition errors:
```

| `partitionOwnershipTimeout` | Timestamp  | Whenever a Data Prepper node acquires a partition, a 10 minute timeout is given to the ownership of this partition to handle the case of a node crashing. This ownership is renewed with another 10 minutes when state is saved for the partition.  |
| `sourcePartitionStatus` | Enum       | Represents the current state of the partition: ASSIGNED (currently being processed), UNASSIGNED (waiting to be processed), CLOSED (waiting to be processed at a later date), and COMPLETED (already processed)                                      |
| `reOpenAt` | Timestamp  | Only applicable to CLOSED partitions. Represents the time that CLOSED partitions re-open and are considered available for processing                                                                                                                |
| `closedCount` | Long       | Tracks how many times the partition has been marked as CLOSED                                                                                                                                                                                       |

### Acquiring items

> Items are acquired in the order that they are returned in the `List<PartitionIdentifer>` provided by the source.

Author: In this context item is a partition, will rename to `Acquiring partitions`

When a node attempts to acquire a partition, the ASSIGNED partitions are first queried to check if any of these ASSIGNED partitions
have expired partition ownerships. This is intended to give priority to partitions that had nodes crash in the middle of processing,
which can allow for using a partition state that may be time sensitive. After querying ASSIGNED partitions, the CLOSED partitions are queried
to see if any of their `reOpenAt` timestamps have been reached. If there are no ASSIGNED or CLOSED partitions available, then the UNASSIGNED partitions
are queried and one of them is acquired.

If this flow occurs, and no partition is acquired by the node, then the partition supplier Function provided in the `getNextPartition` method of `SourceCoordinator`
will be run to create new partitions, and after that is done then the partitions are queried again for ASSIGNED, CLOSED, and then UNASSIGNED partitions.

> ### Global state

Author: This is also only useful for developers

* `partitionsAcquired` - The number of partitions that have been acquired by nodes to do work on. In non-error scenarios, this should be equal to the number of partitions created.
* `partitionsClosed` - The number of partitions that have been marked as CLOSED. Only applicable to sources that use the CLOSED functionality

Error metrics

* `partitionNotFoundErrors` - Indicates that a partition item that is actively owned by a node does not have a corresponding store item. This should only happen if the item in the table has been manually deleted
* `partitionNotOwnedErrors` - Indicates an issue where the node that owns a partition loses ownership due to the partition ownership timeout expiring. Unless the source is able to checkpoint with `saveState`, this will result in duplicate processing
* `partitionUpdateErrors` - The number of errors that were received when an update to the store for this partition item failed. Is prefixed with either `saveState`, `close`, or `complete` to indicate which update action is failing.

> ## Using source coordination for new sources

Reviewer: Would this section only be of interest to Data Prepper developers, or would end-users also want to develop a coordinator for a new sources?

Author: Developers only

Reviewer: I'm going to remove this section then.
